Interactive Health Chatbot for non communicable diseases
The global burden of chronic, non-communicable diseases (NCDs) largely heart disease, stroke, cancer, chronic respiratory disease, and diabetes is increasing rapidly and will have signiﬁcant social, economic, and health consequences unless it is urgently addressed (Sheikh Mohammed Shariful Islam, 2014; Niloofar Peykari, 2017). NCDs have been primarily related to four major risk factors: tobacco use, physical inactivity, the harmful use of alcohol and unhealthy diets (increased fat and sodium, with low fruit and vegetable intake). In 2016, NCDs were responsible annually for more than 38 million deaths and responsible for 16 million premature deaths. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that by 2020, NCD’s will account for 80 percent of global burden of disease, causing seven out of every ten deaths in developing countries about half of them premature deaths under the age of 70. Eighty percent of these deaths are already occurring in low-and middle-income countries. Merriam Webster Dictionary, (2016) defines NCDs as medical condition that is not capable of being communicated by direct contact. Because NCDs are largely preventable, these deaths can be signiﬁcantly reduced (Leanne Riley, January 2016).
Although there has been increased global attention, global targets and indicators have been set and countries’ implementation of these have been monitored but health literacy is still not considered a priority in many countries. Health literacy according to Dodson et al., (2015), means motivation and ability of individuals to gain access to, understand and use information in ways which promote and maintain good health. Low health literacy is a major barrier to delivering preventive healthcare (Omar Metwally MD, 2016). Health literacy is also linked to economic development such that people with low health literacy do not have the ability to engage effectively in socio economic activities due to poor health status, hence people need to stay healthy by promoting health literacy and understanding. (Ester Ernest Mnzava, 2017). 
Despite several health campaigns, efforts and methods that are being used to promote health literacy on NCD’s to the public, the rate of deaths as a result of NCDs continue to increase at an alarming rate (Sheikh Mohammed Shariful Islam, 2014; Niloofar Peykari, 2017). Majority of patients get to know information about NCDs when they happen to visit a hospital, and at that time it might already be too late for them. Most outpatient information for NCDs in Tanzania are provided at hospitals, despite present policies stating that health centres and dispensaries should provide such services. Therefore, there is a weakness in the current health information systems in helping, assisting and providing adequate information to the general public and this is a big problem.